What is the collections module in Python?
The collections module is a built-in Python library that provides extra powerful data structures.

It gives you special containers that are alternatives to the general list, tuple, dict, and set.

These containers are optimized for better performance, readability, and special tasks.

✅ You don't need to install it — just import it:

python
Copy
Edit
import collections



2. Who built the collections module?
It was developed by the Python Software Foundation (PSF).

More specifically, it was introduced by Raymond Hettinger, a core Python developer.

It was officially added in Python 2.4 (around 2004).

3. How many containers come with the collections module?
The main 5 containers you need to know are:


Container	Description
namedtuple()	Tuple with named fields (like an object)
deque	Double-ended queue (faster appends and pops)
Counter	Counts elements easily (like a super dictionary)
OrderedDict	Like a dictionary, but remembers the order of items
defaultdict	Dictionary with a default value if key is missing
⭐️ In Python 3.7+, normal dict also remembers order — but OrderedDict still has extra features.

4. What are the workings of these containers?

Container	How it works
namedtuple	Create tuples where you can access fields by name (like a small class).
deque	A fast list you can add/remove from both sides (left or right).
Counter	Count how many times each item appears in a list or string.
OrderedDict	A dictionary that keeps items in the order you added them.
defaultdict	A dictionary that gives a default value instead of an error if a key doesn’t exist.
5. Where are the uses of containers?

Container	Common Uses
namedtuple	When you want a lightweight object without writing a full class. Example: points, coordinates, records.
deque	Queues and Stacks (First-In-First-Out or Last-In-First-Out structures), like for task scheduling.
Counter	Counting items (votes, elements in a list, characters in a string, etc).
OrderedDict	When order of insertion matters — like building an ordered list of settings or steps.
defaultdict	When you want to group values automatically (e.g., grouping students by marks without checking keys).